== A generic flake

The previous section presented a very high-level view of flakes,
focusing on the basic structure. In this section, we will add a bit more
detail.

Flakes are written in the Nix programming language, which is a
functional language. As with most programming languages, there are many
ways to achieve the same result. Below is an example you can follow when
writing your own flakes. I’ll explain the example in some detail.

[subs=quotes]
----
{
  description = "#_brief package description_#";

  inputs = {
    [.highlight01]#nixpkgs#.url = "github:NixOS/nixpkgs";
    [.highlight02]#flake-utils#.url = "github:numtide/flake-utils";
    [.highlight03]#..._other dependencies_...# ❶
  };

  outputs = { self, [.highlight01]#nixpkgs#, [.highlight02]#flake-utils#, [.highlight03]#..._other dependencies_...# ❷ }:
    flake-utils.lib.eachDefaultSystem (system: ❸
      let
        pkgs = import nixpkgs { inherit system; };
        python = pkgs.python3;
      in
      {
        devShells = rec {
          default = pkgs.mkShell {
            packages = [ #_packages needed for development shell_#; ❹ ]))
            ];
          };

        packages = rec {
          [.highlight04]#myPackageName# = #_package definition_#; ❺
          default = [.highlight04]#myPackageName#;
        };

        apps = rec {
          [.highlight04]#myPackageName# = flake-utils.lib.mkApp { drv = self.packages.${system}.[.highlight04]#myPackageName#; };
          default = [.highlight04]#myPackageName#;
        };
      }
    );
}
----

We discussed how to specify flake inputs `❶` in the previous section, so
this part of the flake should be familiar. Remember also that any
dependencies in the input section should also be listed at the beginning
of the outputs section `❷`.

Now it’s time to look at the content of the output section. If we want
the package to be available for multiple systems (e.g.,
"`x86_64-linux`", "`aarch64-linux`", "`x86_64-darwin`", and
"`aarch64-darwin`"), we need to define the output for each of those
systems. Often the definitions are identical, apart from the name of the
system. The eachDefaultSystem function `❸` provided by flake-utils allows
us to write a single definition using a variable for the system name.
The function then iterates over all default systems to generate the
outputs for each one.

The `devShells` variable specifies the environment that should be
available when doing development on the package. If you don’t need a
special development environment, you can omit this section. At `❹` you
would list any tools (e.g., compilers and language-specific build tools)
you want to have available in a development shell. If the compiler needs
access to language-specific packages, there are Nix functions to assist
with that. These functions are very language-specific, and not always
well-documented. We will see examples for some languages later in the
tutorial. In general, I recommend that you do a web search for
"`nix language`", and try to find resources that were written or updated
recently.

The `packages` variable defines the packages that this flake provides.
The package definition `❺` depends on the programming languages your
software is written in, the build system you use, and more. There are
Nix functions and tools that can simplify much of this, and new,
easier-to-use ones are released regularly. Again, I recommend that you
do a web search for "`nix language`", and try to find resources that
were written or updated recently.

The `apps` variable identifies any applications provided by the flake.
In particular, it identifies the default executable ❻ that `nix run`
will run if you don’t specify an app.

The list below contains are a few functions that are commonly used in
this section.

General-purpose::
  The standard environment provides `mkDerivation`, which is especially
  useful for the typical `./configure; make; make install` scenario.
  It’s customisable.
Python::
  `buildPythonApplication`, `buildPythonPackage`.
Haskell::
  `mkDerivation` (Haskell version, which is a wrapper around the
  standard environment version), `developPackage`, `callCabal2Nix`.
